=================================
Overview of annotation datasets
=================================


To start CWAS-Plus, users should prepare a subset of or total variants that are selected as input from qualifying variants in Variant Call Format (VCF) format (for example, noncoding de novo variants). These variants contain the position, reference allele, alternate allele, and the sample identifications. For CWAS-Plus to utilize the input, the users need to annotate the variants in advance to the variant categorization. The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) is recommended for general output. Besides the basic resources needed for VEP (such as, cache file with human genome database), user-provided annotation datasets are required.

The annotation datasets for CWAS-Plus are divided into five major groups, regarding their genetic features. The groups are (1) variant type, (2) gene biotype, (3) gene list, (4) functional annotation, and (5) functional score. The variant type indicates whether variants are SNVs or insertion-deletions (indels). The gene biotype is defined by the location of the variant relative to genes, such as coding regions or noncoding regions. Conversely, the remaining three groups are based on the user-provided datasets, which are selected based on their connection with the phenotype. For example, the users can add disease risk genes to the gene list group and genomic intervals of disease-specific regulatory elements to the functional annotation group. The users can also utilize datasets that annotate scores into genome sequences, such as conservation scores, to the functional score group. Through the customization of phenotype-specific annotation datasets, the users can test multiple hypothesis regarding the phenotype (details in the Methods section of the paper).

With VEP annotation, variants will be annotated with their consequences and genes or nearest genes, when the variant is at downstream or upstream. Now, we have the variant type and gene biotype based on the length of the alleles and the location of the variant. As these two groups of categories are pre-determined, the users mostly focus on the other three category groups, gene list, functional annotations, and functional scores. These datasets are required to be prepared in text, bed, and bigwig formats, respectively.

For bed custom annotation, CWAS-Plus gathers all functional annotations and scores and merge them into a single bed file. This file contains three columns of positional information and one column of binary code, which indicates which annotation this region falls into. CWAS-Plus encodes this information in binary format in order to save space and reduce execution time. For example, 8 in the fourth column of the merged file refers to 00100, which is a binary code in opposite direction to the normal binary scale. 00100 means that is interval only falls into the third functional annotation dataset. This order is fixed by CWAS-Plus in advance, with alphabetical order of the names of the datasets.

